Introduction to Time Series Analysis and Forecasting by Douglas C. Montgomery, Cheryl L. Jennings, Murat Kulahci

Chapter 1 - Introduction to Forecasting
It is difficult to make predictions, especially about the future
NEILS BOHR, Danish physicist

1.1 The nature and uses of forecasts
A forecast is a prediction of some future event or events. As suggested by Neils Bohr, making good predictions is not always easy.

Forecasting is an important problem that spans many fields including business and industry, government, economics, environmental sciences,
medicine, social science, politics, and finance.  (some Examples in each field?)

Forecasting problems are often classified as short-term, medium-term, and long-term. 
Short-term forecasting problems involve predicting events only a few time periods (days, weeks, and months) into the future. 
Medium-term forecasts extend from 1 to 2 years into the future, and long-term forecasting problems can extend beyond that by many years.

Short- and medium-term forecasts are required for activities that range from operations management to budgeting and selecting new research and development projects. 
Long-term forecasts impact issues such as strategic planning. 

Short- and medium-term forecasting is typically based on identifying, modeling, and extrapolating the patterns found in historical data. 
Because these historical data usually exhibit inertia and do not change dramatically very quickly, statistical
methods are very useful for short- and medium-term forecasting.

A time series is a time-oriented or chronological sequence of observations on a variable of interest.

The reason that forecasting is so important is that prediction of future events is a critical input into many types of planning and decision-making
processes, with application to areas such as the following:

1. Operations Management. Business organizations routinely use forecasts of product sales or demand for services in order to schedule
production, control inventories, manage the supply chain, determine staffing requirements, and plan capacity. Forecasts may also be used
to determine the mix of products or services to be offered and the locations at which products are to be produced.
2. Marketing. Forecasting is important in many marketing decisions. Forecasts of sales response to advertising expenditures, new promotions, or changes in pricing polices enable businesses to evaluate
their effectiveness, determine whether goals are being met, and make adjustments.
3. Finance and Risk Management. Investors in financial assets are interested in forecasting the returns from their investments. These assets
include but are not limited to stocks, bonds, and commodities; other investment decisions can be made relative to forecasts of interest
rates, options, and currency exchange rates. Financial risk management requires forecasts of the volatility of asset returns so that
the risks associated with investment portfolios can be evaluated and insured, and so that financial derivatives can be properly priced.
4. Economics. Governments, financial institutions, and policy organizations require forecasts of major economic variables, such as gross
domestic product, population growth, unemployment, interest rates, inflation, job growth, production, and consumption. These forecasts
are an integral part of the guidance behind monetary and fiscal policy, and budgeting plans and decisions made by governments. They
are also instrumental in the strategic planning decisions made by business organizations and financial institutions.
5. Industrial Process Control. Forecasts of the future values of critical quality characteristics of a production process can help determine when important controllable variables in the process should be
changed, or if the process should be shut down and overhauled. Feedback and feedforward control schemes are widely used in monitoring
and adjustment of industrial processes, and predictions of the process
output are an integral part of these schemes.
6. Demography. Forecasts of population by country and regions are made routinely, often stratified by variables such as gender, age,
and race. Demographers also forecast births, deaths, and migration patterns of populations. Governments use these forecasts for planning
policy and social service actions, such as spending on health care, retirement programs, and antipoverty programs. Many businesses
use forecasts of populations by age groups to make strategic plans regarding developing new product lines or the types of services that
will be offered.


Quantitative forecasting techniques make formal use of historical data and a forecasting model. The model formally summarizes patterns in the
data and expresses a statistical relationship between previous and current values of the variable. Then the model is used to project the patterns in
the data into the future. In other words, the forecasting model is used to extrapolate past and current behavior into the future. 

There are several types of forecasting models in general use. The three most widely used are regression models, smoothing models, and general time series models.

Regression models make use of relationships between the variable of interest and one or more related predictor variables. Sometimes regression
models are called causal forecasting models, because the predictor variables are assumed to describe the forces that cause or drive the observed
values of the variable of interest. An example would be using data on house purchases as a predictor variable to forecast furniture sales.
The method of least squares is the formal basis of most regression models.

Smoothing models typically employ a simple function of previous observations to provide a forecast of the variable of interest. These methods may have a
formal statistical basis, but they are often used and justified heuristically on the basis that they are easy to use and produce satisfactory results.

General time series models employ the statistical properties of the historical data to specify a formal model and then estimate the unknown parameters
of this model (usually) by least squares.

1.2 some Examples of time series 
Time series plots can reveal patterns such as random, trends, level shifts, periods or cycles, unusual observations, or a combination of patterns.

In addition to assisting in the identification of steady-state patterns, time series plots may also draw attention to the occurrence of atypical events.
Another type of unusual event may be the failure of the data measurement or collection system.

1.3 THE FORECASTING PROCESS 
1. Problem definition
2. Data collection
3. Data analysis
4. Model selection and fitting
5. Model validation
6. Forecasting model deployment
7. Monitoring forecasting model performance

1.4 Data for forecasting
1.4.2 Data Cleaning

Before data are used to develop a time series model, it should be subjected to several different kinds of checks, including but not necessarily
limited to the following:
1. Is there missing data?
2. Does the data fall within an expected range?
3. Are there potential outliers or other unusual values?

1.4.3 Imputation
Data imputation is the process of correcting missing data or replacing outliers with an estimation process. Imputation replaces missing or erroneous
values with a “likely” value based on other available information. This enables the analysis to work with statistical techniques which are designed
to handle the complete data sets.

Mean value imputation

Regression

Hot deck imputation is an old technique that is also known as the last value carried forward method. The term “hot deck” comes from the use
of computer punch cards. The deck of cards was “hot” because it was currently in use. 

Cold deck imputation uses information from a deck of cards not currently in use. In hot deck imputation, the missing values are
imputed by using values from similar complete observations. If there are several variables, sort the data by the variables that are most related to
the missing observation and then, starting at the top, replace the missing values with the value of the immediately preceding variable. There are
many variants of this procedure.

1.5 RESOURCES FOR FORECASTING
There are three professional journals devoted to forecasting:
 Journal of Forecasting
 International Journal of Forecasting
 Journal of Business Forecasting Methods and Systems

In addition to these specialized forecasting journals, there are several other mainstream statistics and operations research/management
science journals that publish papers on forecasting, including:
 Journal of Business and Economic Statistics
 Management Science
 Naval Research Logistics
 Operations Research
 International Journal of Production Research
 Journal of Applied Statistics




